# Targeted ONT Variant Calling and Annotation Benchmark

## Overview  
This repository contains the code, workflows, and notes for my thesis project:  
**“Benchmarking variant calling and functional annotation tools using targeted long-read sequencing data generated by Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT).”** conducted by Hai-Van Vo, under the supervision of Dr. Minh-Thong Le, School of Biotechnology, International University (Vietnam National University HCMC) and support from BSc. Nhat-Thong Le, Research Center for Infectious Disease, International University (VIetnam National University HCMC).

The aim of this project is to systematically evaluate and compare different variant calling and annotation tools on a simulated targeted long-read sequencing dataset based on Nanopore error profiles, in order to identify reliable and efficient tools for accurate variant detection and functional interpretation.


---

## Workflow design

1. **Data acquisition**
2. **QC**

Used NanoStat (v1.46.1) to assess the quality of reads.

3. **Preprocessing**

Used Chopper (v0.10.0) to filter low-quality reads.

4. **Alignment**

Used minimap2 (v2.30-r1287) and GRCh38 reference genome for mapping, samtools to convert SAM -> BAM for variant calling.

5. **Variant calling and Benchmarking**
- Variant callers:

| Tool        | Variant type detection | Parameters/Model (can change based on data use) |
|-------------|-----------|-----------|
| cuteSV    | SVs        | --max_cluster_bias_INS 100 --diff_ratio_merging_INS 0.3 --max_cluster_bias_DEL 100 --diff_ratio_merging_DEL 0.3 |
| Sniffles2    | SVs       | Default |
| DeepVariant | SNVs, indels        | --model_type=ONT_R104 |
| Clair3 | SNVs, indels | --platform=ont, model: r941_prom_sup_g5014 |
| FreeBayes | SNVs, indels | Default |

(Since DeepVariant didn't support R9 model, I used R10 model for my R9 dataset instead, therefore, the accuracy was affected. To use R9 model, we can use PEPPER-Margin-DeepVariant, though this tool wasn't supported by Google so I didn't include in my thesis).

- Truth set (Note that for HG001 sample, there wasn't a relevant SV truth set):
  + GIAB truth set
    
    HG001: https://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/giab/ftp/release/NA12878_HG001/NISTv4.2.1/GRCh38/
    
    HG002: https://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/giab/ftp/release/AshkenazimTrio/HG002_NA24385_son/NIST_SV_v0.6/
    
    HG002 (SV): https://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/giab/ftp/release/AshkenazimTrio/HG002_NA24385_son/CMRG_v1.00/GRCh38/StructuralVariant/
    
  + Targeted BED panel (https://github.com/HKU-BAL/ECNano/blob/main/bed/mes_with_gene.hg38_nochr.bed) to intersect with GIAB truth set
 
- Metrics: F1-score, Precision, Recall.
  
- Benchmarking tools: RTG vcfeval (for SNV/Indel callers), Truvari (for SV callers)
 
6. **Functional annotation and Benchmarking**
- Annotation software: VEP, ANNOVAR, AnnotSV, SnpEff

- Benchmarking method: Comparative analysis among 4 softwares
  + SNVs and Indel consequence concordance: For small variants, the performance of VEP, SnpEff, and ANNOVAR was assessed by comparing the distribution of predicted functional consequences. The analysis aimed to evaluate the consistency of nomenclature and classification across different databases. AnnotSV was not included in this benchmarking approach since the tool was designed for SV annotation only.
  + SV gene-level consensus: Due to the complexity of the variants, a multi-tool concordance analysis including AnnotSV was performed. The evaluation focused on the level of agreement among all four tools in identifying SVs within a prioritized list of clinically relevant genes.

---





